+++
type = "post"
date = "2009-04-27"
title = "All Your Repositories Are Belong To Us"
description = ""
slug = "all-your-repositories-are-belong-to-us"
tags = []
+++

<p>Who would have thought that the Repository Pattern could become a battleground?&# 160; I always thought it was pretty straightforward—at least, that’s how I felt when I first read <em>Domain-Driven Design</em> a few years ago.</p> <p>While I could immediately see the benefits of using a repository, there were a few things that really bothered me as I started implementing the pattern that I could never fully reconcile:</p> <ol> <li>How do we best query the repository to find the particular aggregates that we care about?</li> <li>How do we handle UI concerns such as paging within the repository?</li> <li>Does the repository even care about UI concerns?</li> <li>How do we display domain objects to the UI (this is only slightly related to the repository pattern).</li> <li>How do we modify our domain objects to support lazy loading?</li> </ol> <p>When I first stumbled upon Greg Young’s solution of Command Query Separation as an architectural pattern, I immediately knew that this was the way to go.&# 160; It was as though someone turned on a light bulb—a really big light bulb.&# 160; It was an idea whose time had come.&# 160; Paradigm shifts are like that.&# 160; The bigger the attachment to the old philosophy, the bigger the “ah ha!” when you finally see it in a new light.</p> <p>CQS instantly solved all of my problems and questions with repositories.&# 160; The answer is simple—you don’t query the repository to perform searches.&# 160; Instead, you load specific aggregates from the repository by their identity.&# 160; Further, paging is purely a UI concern, therefore we query a completely different data source--or at least access the data source through another mechanism.&# 160; Queries and searches are performed against this alternate mechanism as well.&# 160; Lastly we don’t display our domain objects.&# 160; We display simple DTOs that have been queried through this alternate data access mechanism.</p> <p>With all of this as introduction, it has been very amusing and informative to see Oren and Greg battle it out regarding repositories in general:</p> <ul> <li>Oren claims that the <a href="http://ayende.com/Blog/archive/2009/04/17/repository-is-the-new-singleton.aspx">repository is the new anti-pattern.</a></li> <li>Greg responds saying <a href="http://codebetter.com/blogs/gregyoung/archive/2009/04/23/repository-is-dead-long-live-repository.aspx">we don’t want to query the repository</a>.</li> <li>Oren rebuts the argument and clarifies saying <a href="http://ayende.com/Blog/archive/2009/04/23/night-of-the-living-repositories.aspx">YAGNI</a>.</li> <li>Greg rebuts by saying <a href="http://codebetter.com/blogs/gregyoung/archive/2009/04/24/more-on-repository.aspx">the repository is not arbitrary, but serves a definite purpose and is a necessary abstraction</a>.</li> <li>Oren concludes and <a href="http://ayende.com/Blog/archive/2009/04/26/the-repositoryrsquos-daughter.aspx">agrees to disagree</a>.</li> </ul> <p>All of the posts are worth reading several times.&# 160; Summing them up in a single phrase doesn’t do them justice.&# 160; Further, the summary I gave is a bit arbitrary as it may not accurately express the main concepts of each post.</p> <p>Being a huge fan of CQS, I’m going to have to go with Greg on this one.&# 160; No surprises there.&# 160; Even so, I find Oren’s blog inspiring to read.&# 160; The frequency of his posts make me wonder if he does anything else, but the amount of <strong>tested</strong> code he cranks out is astounding.&# 160; In frequency of blog posts, Oren wins hands down.</p> <p>To conclude, I see this debate as a healthy thing in the DDD community and the ALT.NET community.</p> 