+++
type = "post"
date = "2008-12-19"
title = "Assembly & Artifact Storage"
description = ""
slug = "assembly-artifact-storage"
tags = []
+++

<p>In the process of implementing a more advanced process for our build server the question ultimately arose, &quot;What do we do with the assemblies and other artifacts that are created?&quot;  The easiest and perhaps the best solution is<strong> </strong>to store them in your version control repository along with everything else, provided you are using a system capable of performing binary deltas on your files, e.g. Subversion.</p> <p>In our situation we wanted to build artifacts and store them in a tagged directory of SVN in order to easily get the exact binaries that were created at any point in time.  As we implemented the solution and performed a handful of builds we watched the repository start to grow at an unacceptable rate which necessitated a change in our methodologies.</p> <p>There were several reasons for storing all build artifacts in SVN:</p> <ul> <li>Ability to get exact revision of builds at a point in time. </li> <li>Make each project self-contained, with all necessary artifacts, build scripts, build tools, etc., all linked using svn:externals. </li> <li>Easy geo-distribution of any team member. This is useful for me as I work at the office and at home, as well as anyone else working offsite. </li> </ul> <p>David Bell wrote an <a href="http://www.ibm.com/developerworks/java/library/j-svnbins.html">excellent article</a> on the ins and outs of Subversion storage.  His example metrics were a little bit skewed because of the size of the files he was working with--100 MB and larger.  Our largest binaries are only a few hundred KB in size.  Nevertheless it is an worthwhile read.</p> <p>For our solution we did an &quot;efficient check-in&quot; as David Bell terms it in his article.  The efficient check-in scenario follows these general steps:</p> <ol> <li>Checkout your &quot;artifacts&quot; directory from Subversion and create a local, working copy - we'll call this the &quot;commit&quot; directory.</li> <li>Perform your build which creates artifacts in your &quot;compile&quot; directory.</li> <li>Recursively remove any files or directories from the commit directory that do not exist in the compile directory.</li> <li>Copy all files and directories from the compile to the commit directory.</li> <li>Commit.</li> </ol> <p>In this fashion you get delta-based processing on all binary files.  This allows you to store only a few KB per commit rather than a few MB.</p> 