+++
type = "post"
date = "2009-02-16"
title = "DDD: CQS and Bounded Contexts"
description = ""
slug = "ddd-cqs-and-bounded-contexts"
tags = []
+++

<p>Since publishing my last post a few minutes ago, I came across a <a href="http://devlicio.us/blogs/casey/archive/2009/02/12/ddd-command-query-separation-as-an-architectural-concept.aspx">Develicious post</a> by Casey Charlton.  He's covered what I have said in significantly more detail.</p> <p>The really cool thing that he brings out, as we both refer back to some of Greg Young's <a href="http://codebetter.com/blogs/gregyoung/archive/2009/01/13/dddd-master-detail-question.aspx">architecture concepts</a>, is that the domain/command operations could be in separate bounded context from the reporting bounded context.  In fact, these two systems could have a completely different data store--something that Greg mentioned in his <a href="http://www.infoq.com/interviews/greg-young-ddd">InfoQ video</a>.</p> <p>As an aside, the thought occurred to me that perhaps you could have the same data store for reading in both models, but writes to that data store were done through a completely different mechanism--use of a message queue.  This way contention of the store could be lowered significantly.  No idea on the consequences of such an move just yet, but it's something to be analyzed further.</p> <p>It makes sense to have different bounded contexts and corresponding repositories for domain operations versus reporting because the needs are so different.  Further, you could potentially do all domain, write-based operations in memory and, with the messaging pattern I pointed out above, you could be assured that the commands being performed would have their state persisted, but in a more scalable, asynchronous manner--without making the domain wait until the database connection was opened, written, committed, and closed.</p> 