+++
type = "post"
date = "2009-03-31"
title = "DDDD: Producers and Consumers"
description = ""
slug = "dddd-producers-and-consumers"
tags = []
+++

<p>About a year ago, Greg wrote a good article on <a href="http://codebetter.com/blogs/gregyoung/archive/2008/04/25/dddd-9-producers-and-consumers.aspx">producers and consumers</a>.  It's an excellent read but is a little too abstract if you're brand new to DDDD.  I would strongly recommend reading (at least three times) each of the previous blog posts from Greg in the DDDD series and watching all of the videos as listed in my <a href="/2009/03/dddd-and-cqs-getting-started.html">Getting Started</a> post.</p> <p>Fortunately, Greg is very active in the <a href="http://tech.groups.yahoo.com/group/domaindrivendesign/">Domain-Driven Design Yahoo Group</a>.  Because of this, there are little gems that can be extracted by following his posts.  Before I post the link, I must say that often times message boards replies—and the corresponding original question(s)--don't have have an adequate amount of context to be able to decipher them properly.  [E.g. “What is the marital status of the number five?&quot;]  The reason for this is that there is a mountain of knowledge being brought to bear on the subject and only little flakes come through in a response.</p> <p>Greg's blog post was about a year ago, but his technique, <a href="http://tech.groups.yahoo.com/group/domaindrivendesign/message/11302">per this thread</a>, has evolved slightly since that time—as techniques should over time and experience.</p> <p>In his <a href="http://codebetter.com/blogs/gregyoung/archive/2008/04/25/dddd-9-producers-and-consumers.aspx">original blog post</a> he lists three separate interfaces, IConsume, IProduce, and IPublish.  In the aforementioned thread, it has been consolidated to two—Consumes (<a href="http://stackoverflow.com/questions/222457/are-there-established-alternatives-to-isomething-isomethingable-for-interfaces">notice the missing “I” prefix</a>) and IPublish—but the total number of methods remains the same: three.</p> <p>The great thing about the IPublish interface is that it's pretty much a pipes and filters interface which, as he mentions in the thread, allows you to do a lot of really cool things—queuing, serialization (sending through a message channel), changing thread boundaries, etc.</p> 