+++
type = "post"
date = "2011-11-02"
title = "EventStore v3.0 Release"
description = ""
slug = "eventstore-v3-0-release"
tags = []
+++

<p align="justify">It's been a little while in coming, but nonetheless, I'm pleased to release the latest version of the CQRS <a href="https://github.com/joliver/EventStore/">EventStore</a>  As always, you can find the source code on GitHub as well as the official <a href="https://github.com/joliver/EventStore/downloads">pre-built binaries</a>.  You can also find the <a href="http://nuget.org/List/Packages/EventStore">EventStore package</a> on the NuGet Gallery.  NuGet is the recommended way to install.</p>  <p align="justify">New in the release (since the v3.0 beta release)</p>  <ul>   <li>     <div align="justify"><strong>Fixes in the SQL implementation that could cause </strong><a href="https://github.com/joliver/EventStore/issues/84"><strong>concurrency exceptions</strong></a><strong> when running multiple instances of the EventStore against a single backend storage.</strong></div>   </li>    <li>     <div align="justify"><a href="https://github.com/joliver/EventStore/issues/80">Better SQL paging support</a> when working with large data sets.</div>   </li>    <li>     <div align="justify">Added a <a href="https://github.com/joliver/EventStore/issues/87">CommittedHeaders</a> property to stream to help determine which “aggregate type” created the stream.</div>   </li>    <li>     <div align="justify">Pointing to the latest versions of RavenDB, Mongo, MySql Connector, Json.NET, and ServiceStack.</div>   </li>    <li>     <div align="justify">Added full logging across the library.  Various logging implementations are supported including log4net and NLog.</div>   </li>    <li>     <div align="justify">Added the ability to “<a href="https://github.com/joliver/EventStore/pull/76">upconvert</a>” events as they are loaded from persistence.</div>   </li>    <li>     <div align="justify">Added ability to share IDbConnection across multiple operations on a single thread using a “<a href="https://github.com/joliver/EventStore/blob/master/src/proj/EventStore.Persistence.SqlPersistence/ConnectionScope.cs">ConnectionScope</a>” to avoid 2PC promotion when using TransactionScope.</div>   </li> </ul>  <p align="justify">Looking forward:</p>  <ul>   <li>     <div align="justify">.NET 4.0 only.  Sorry for those still using .NET 3.5 (CLR 2), it's time to upgrade.</div>   </li>    <li>     <div align="justify">As with most open source libraries, the docs are deficient.  Part of the next release is to get a few GitHub wiki pages going along with some good code examples.</div>   </li>    <li>     <div align="justify">As mention in the <a href="/2011/09/cqrs-eventstore-v3-0/">3.0 beta post</a>, the essence and spirit of the CommonDomain project will be merged into the EventStore.</div>   </li>    <li>     <div align="justify">More storage engine support will be forthcoming.</div>   </li>    <li>     <div align="justify">Two areas that need a little bit of attention are the API surrounding snapshots as well as the concept of “GetFrom(DateTime start)”.  I'll be looking at doing something more like “GetFrom(int index)” in the near future.</div>   </li> </ul>