+++
type = "post"
date = "2010-04-14"
title = "Extending NServiceBus: Thread-Specific Message Modules"
description = ""
slug = "extending-nservicebus-thread-specific-message-modules"
tags = []
+++

<p align="justify">NServiceBus message modules are global objects that are invoked at various stages of processing for a physical message, e.g. during receipt, when processing is complete, and upon any error condition.&# 160; Their typical use case is to setup thread-specific values, such as outbound message headers or starting up a new instance of ISession and storing it on the thread.</p> <p align="justify">Message modules, while incredibly powerful, are somewhat troublesome.&# 160; First, because they’re shared, we have to remember to to avoid storing any state about message processing unless we store it on the thread by decorating it with the ThreadStatic attribute.</p> <p align="justify">One other quirk of message modules is that they execute from first to last for HandleBeginMessage, HandleEndMessage, and HandleError.&# 160; In some situations, such as deterministic resource disposal, it would be nice to have them invoked from first to last for HandleBeginMessage and then last to first for HandleEndMessage/HandleError—in an inner-to-outer style.</p> <p align="justify">The biggest challenge relates to not having a “final”-type method.&# 160; While message modules do expose HandleEndMessage and HandleError, we have no way of knowing which will be called last.&# 160; True, HandleError will always be called after HandleEndMessage, but we have no way to determine if HandleError will be called once HandleEndMessage is invoked.&# 160; Note that HandleEndMessage is always called, even in error conditions.</p> <p align="justify"><strong>A Typical Example</strong></p> <p align="justify">We have a situation that requires setting up an alternate TransactionScope outside of the normal TransactionScope associated with the processing of the message.&# 160; Essentially we want to perform a “new TransactionScope(TransactionScopeOption.RequiresNew)”.&# 160; We can do this in a message module without difficulty.&# 160; The problem comes when we’re ready to Complete() the scope.&# 160; Where do we call Complete()?&# 160; NServiceBus is responsible for the transaction surrounding the processing of the message from the queue and is responsible for committing that transaction, but what about our transaction?&# 160; Our transaction is not enlisted in the ambient transaction which means that we are responsible for calling Complete() explicitly.</p> <p align="justify">If we called Complete() from HandleEndMessage, how can we be sure that HandleError will not be called?&# 160; If we did call Complete() and HandleError was called, it would be too late to roll back.</p> <p align="justify"><a href="http://tech.groups.yahoo.com/group/nservicebus/message/5481">One workaround</a> is to create a base message handler from which our message handler derives.&# 160; This works great if you only have a single message handler per message (which is a best practice), but suppose we needed to have two handlers process the message?&# 160; We would be required to implement a pre-handler and a post-handler for our example above.&# 160; While it works, it less than ideal.</p> <p align="justify"><strong>The Solution</strong></p> <p align="justify">What if there was something kind of like a message module but kind of like a message handler—something in between?&# 160; What if we had something whose lifetime was specific the processing of a physical message?&# 160; What if it was invoked at critical points before and after all message handlers?&# 160; What if it was thread specific so we wouldn’t have to worry about ThreadStatic attributes.</p> <p align="justify"><a href="http://github.com/joliver/NServiceBus.MessageSinks">I created a proof of concept</a> around the these principles and am calling it a “<strong>MessageSink</strong>”.&# 160; A MessageSink exposes four critical points during the processing of a physical message:</p> <ul> <li> <div align="justify"><strong>Initialize</strong>: Before message processing.</div> </li> <li> <div align="justify">(Message handlers run here)</div> </li> <li> <div align="justify"><strong>Success</strong>: After all handlers have completed successfully.</div> </li> <li> <div align="justify"><strong>Failure</strong>: If any handler has thrown an exception.</div> </li> <li> <div align="justify"><strong>Dispose</strong>: After success or failure, when we’re “cleaning up the sink”.</div> </li> </ul> <p align="justify">One other cool think about MessageSinks is that, unlike message modules, they are called in order for Initialize and then in reverse order for Success/Failure/Dispose.&# 160; This means that resources can be committed and cleaned up from an inner to outer manner.</p> <p align="justify">Rather than modifying the NSB source code to implement this custom behavior, I found that by implementing a custom ITransport which wraps the actual transport, usually MsmqTransport, I was able to create the above behavior.</p> <p align="justify">I don’t yet have a convenient way to get this into NSB per the regular configuration syntax.&# 160; I’m planning on creating a small proxy for IContainer which detects resolution of ITransport and then wraps the actual ITransport received from the container with the “MessageSinkTransport” and then returns the wrapped ITransport to NSB.</p> <p align="justify"><strong>Conclusion</strong></p> <p align="justify">While NServiceBus message modules are incredibly capable there are certain scenarios where they do not adequately cover our requirements.&# 160; By leveraging message sinks we can more predictably gain access into the message processing pipeline to better respond to the various events which occur during such processing.</p> 