+++
type = "post"
date = "2009-10-05"
title = "Git Submodules like svn:externals"
description = ""
slug = "git-submodules-like-svnexternals"
tags = []
+++

<p>One critical difference between Git submodules and Subversion “externals” is the concept that submodules are locked to a particular commit.  Normally this is a “good thing” because blindly attaching yourself to a particular branch in Subversion can have interesting an unexpected consequences when the branch changes out from underneath you.  Subversion provides a way to “lock” to a particular revision via the “-r” parameter in the svn:externals declaration, e.g.”name –r commit_url”.</p> <p>One of the great benefits and drawbacks about Git is that it doesn’t protect you from the itself.  It’s very much a <a href="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Leaky_abstraction">leaky abstraction</a>.  Because of this, you have the power you can do pretty much anything you want to a Git repository—effectively carte blanche.  One area in which this <strong>does not</strong> apply is submodules.  Submodules are locked to exactly one revision and that’s the way it is as far as Git is concerned.</p> <p>There are three ways to update submodules to a new commit.</p> <ol> <li>By hand—via git pull within the submodule and then a commit on the supermodule.</li> <li>With a script to be invoked by hand or automatically by a build server which performs the operation of # 1 but in a consistent fashion.</li> <li>A post-checkout script automatically invoked by Git.</li> </ol> <p>We have opted for option # 2, at least for the time being.</p> <p><strong>A Better Way</strong></p> <p>Unfortunately as of this writing, there doesn’t appear to be a better way to solve this issue.  This is why I propose the “—track” option for submodules.</p> <p>Git branches can be tracked by using the “–track” option when creating a branch.  This same approach would make sense for a submodule as well.  Why not, when creating a submodule have something like this:</p> <blockquote> <p>git submodule add --<strong>track</strong> <remote_url:><strong>BRANCH_TO_TRACK</strong>> <local_path></local_path></remote_url:></p> </blockquote> <p>The idea would be that the submodule would “track” the current head of a particular repository branch.  In this way, the default behavior is preserved and those that *want* enough rope to hang themselves if they aren’t careful may do so at their own risk.</p> <p>The .gitmodules file and .git/config file would be modified to have the following attribute:</p> <p>[submodule “local/path”]</p> <blockquote> <p>path = local/path</p> <p>url = remote_url.git</p> <p><strong>track = remote_branch_name</strong></p> </blockquote> <p>In our current build infrastructure, we currently modify the .gitmodules file with the “track” option and have a script check for the track option so that we can follow a particular branch when the script is invoked.</p> 