+++
type = "post"
date = "2009-09-03"
title = "Git Lost (and Git Submodules)"
description = ""
slug = "git-lost-and-git-submodules"
tags = []
+++

<p>We’ve been using Git for a little while now in a Windows environment and we have been quite pleased with it and the capabilities it affords us as part with its decentralized workflow.  We have a number of shared projects or “common libraries” that we use between projects.  Because of this, we are using Git’s submodules feature.</p> <p>One small issue that we hit was when we would make changes to the code to the project in a submodule (for example, some scripting code in a submodule), we would want to commit and push those changes.  Whenever we would attempt to commit, we would get one of two messages:</p> <blockquote> <p>$ git push origin master</p> <p><strong>Everything up-to-date</strong></p> </blockquote> <p>That’s frustrating.  Things definitely were not up-to-date.  We could do a “git log” and see the difference between the local repository and the remote repository.  Why was it saying things were “up-to-date”?</p> <p>Other times, we’d get an even more frustrating error message:</p> <blockquote> <p>$ git push origin master</p> <p>To git@……..</p> <p><strong>! [rejected]      …. –> master (non-fast forward)</strong></p> <p><strong>error failed to push …..</strong></p> </blockquote> <p>What kind of error message is that?  The part that made it confusing was that “non-fast forward” means that I’m not working at the head—basically I’m working off an older comment and trying to push that to the head.  That made no sense because a “git pull” wouldn’t give me anything new.</p> <p><strong>The Ah-Ha Moment</strong></p> <p>Run “git status” while in the submodule.  It will say “Not currently on any branch.”  There’s the problem.  If I’m not working on a branch (even master), Git has trouble.  To remedy this, run “git checkout master” before you do any work in the submodule.</p> <p>Of course, this is all by-design: <a href="http://git.or.cz/gitwiki/GitSubmoduleTutorial">http://git.or.cz/gitwiki/GitSubmoduleTutorial</a></p> <p>When you do “git submodule update” and pull all the submodules down, it doesn’t check them out on a particular branch.  According to the above article:</p> <blockquote> <p>One major difference between &quot;submodule update&quot; and &quot;submodule add&quot; is that &quot;update&quot; checks out a specific commit, rather than the tip of a branch. It's like checking out a tag: the head is <em><strong>detached</strong></em>, so you're not working on a branch.</p> </blockquote> <p>So that’s the solution—checkout a branch first (even if it’s master), do your work and push.</p> 