+++
type = "post"
date = "2009-03-18"
title = "Infinite Loop Event Sourcing"
description = ""
slug = "infinite-loop-event-sourcing"
tags = []
+++

<p>Greg Young talks about using an <a href="http://martinfowler.com/eaaCatalog/identityMap.html">identity map</a> to help avoid hitting the persistence engine and making it the bottleneck for the entire system.&# 160; In a fully distributed scenario, the <a href="/2009/03/event-sourcing-and-committing.html">event pipeline</a> coming out of the repository would publish any events committed to an aggregate to all interested parties.&# 160; These interested parties would include a <a href="/2009/03/event-sourcing-and-committing.html">persistence engine</a> subscriber, other bounded contexts, and other instances of the same bounded context.&# 160; Other instances of the same bounded context would use an identity map and listen to messages for aggregates that already held in memory--other messages would be ignored.</p> <p>When using an identity map there are several things to keep in mind:</p> <ol> <li>The identity map sits between the repository and the persistence engine.</li> <li>The identity map must only hand out transactionally consistent aggregate roots.</li> <li>Applying events within the identity map must not cause events to be published. </li> </ol> <p><strong>Do I Need To Sit Between You Two?</strong></p> <p>The identity map sits &quot;between&quot; the repository and the persistence engine so that it can service requests for a particular aggregate root.&# 160; If it's able to service the request, because it has one in memory, it hands the in-memory instance back.&# 160; If not, the repository goes to the persistence engine and load the values and stores the reconstituted aggregate root the identity map.</p> <p>This step alone takes a huge burden off of the persistence engine.</p> <p><strong>Transactionally Consistent</strong></p> <p>Normally an identity map is unique to a unit of work such that each unit of work would have its own identity map holding non-shared reference to an aggregate.&# 160; While this statement is true, it's not entirely complete when dealing with distributed-messaging scenarios.</p> <p>Specifically, one of the things that the message-based identity map does is listen as a subscriber to all events published by other processes or instances of the same bounded context.&# 160; If an event comes in and the aggregate to which the event pertains is in memory, it processes the event against the aggregate.&# 160; If the aggregate is not in memory, it simply drops the message.</p> <p>We have to be very careful to ensure that when a series of events comes in as part of a single transaction, that we apply all events before handing back a reference to the aggregate.&# 160;&# 160; If we don't, we risk passing back the aggregate in an inconsistent--or even invalid--state.</p> <p>Furthermore, we have to be careful not to apply messages to the aggregate root reference that is currently being processed as part of the unit of work.&# 160; It would seem as though this message-based identity map is two layers deep.&# 160; There would be a session-level identity map which holds session-level references and a process-level identity map which subscribes to messages from other instances of the same bounded context and applies them when they arrive.</p> <p>For optimistic concurrency, it would appear that when a unit of work was complete, the aggregate version at the start of the unit of work would be compared with the aggregate version in the process-level identity map.&# 160; If the two were the same, the unit of work would commit, otherwise, the transaction would rollback and the unit of work would be re-attempted.</p> <p>Lastly, it would also appear that the process-level identity map doesn't hand out the same reference to specific aggregate root twice.&# 160; Instead it would appear that it hands out copies.&# 160; The&# 160; main reason for this is so that multiple units of work could potentially be executing against the same aggregate root simultaneously, with optimistic concurrency protecting each instance from the other.&# 160; The other reason is so that, if a unit of work failed, we wouldn't have to figure out how to rollback the aggregate.&# 160; Instead we could just toss out the reference and get a new one.</p> <p><strong>Infinite Loop</strong></p> <p>Lastly, when applying events received to the aggregate from other instances of the same bounded context, we want to ensure that we ignore the events that come out the other side.&# 160; This means that, by definition, when I send an aggregate a &quot;UserNameChanged&quot; event, the aggregate produces a &quot;UserNameChanged&quot; event as a result in a 1-1 consume/produce fashion.</p> <p>We don't want to publish these events, otherwise, we might inadvertently create an infinite loop between all the other instances of the same bounded context.</p> 