+++
type = "post"
date = "2009-09-18"
title = "NHibernate, Inverse, and Object Associations"
description = ""
slug = "nhibernate-inverse-and-object-associations"
tags = []
+++

<p>You gotta love NHibernate.&# 160; But sometimes there are little quirks the drive you nuts—at least until you understand how NHibernate handles things.&# 160; We ran into one such “hiccup” the other day.</p> <p>Our objective was to have a parent object contain a list of child objects.&# 160; Simple enough.&# 160; Problem is, we didn’t want the child to know about or have a reference back to the parent.&# 160; But all of the simple example code that we found for NHibernate and Fluent NHibernate kept showing the bidirectional reference.</p> <p><strong>Inverse To The Rescue…Almost</strong></p> <p>The whole idea about the inverse attribute, specifically Inverse=true, is so that the parent “owns” the collection.&# 160; We thought this was enough.&# 160; Nope.&# 160; We kept getting issues where the database would throw an exception because NHibernate was trying to insert a null “parent ID” value into the child table.</p> <p>After digging deeper, we came up with the following feature matrix related to the value:</p> <p><strong>Inverse=False means that:</strong></p> <ol> <li>Child object is inserted first (null parent id).</li> <li>Parent object is inserted second.</li> <li>Child is then updated with parent id.</li> <li>Parent id in child table must be <strong>nullable</strong>.</li> <li>Child doesn’t need a reference to the parent.</li> </ol> <p><strong>Inverse=True means that:</strong></p> <ol> <li>Parent inserted first.</li> <li>Child inserted (with parent id value populated) second.</li> <li>Parent id in child table can be (but need not be) nullable.</li> <li>Child must have a reference to the parent.</li> </ol> <p>Unfortunately, we couldn’t have it both ways.&# 160; We wanted the parent to have a reference to the child AND to have the parent id column in the child table to be “not null”.&# 160; In the end, we decided on Inverse=True.</p> <p><strong>DDD Guidance</strong></p> <p>When working with aggregates, the guidance is to access everything through the aggregate root.&# 160; So, when we create a child object, we simply call myParentObject.CreateChild() and we have the CreateChild method enforce the bidirectional reference.</p> <p><strong>Legacy Codebase</strong></p> <p>The solution above is for one of our legacy codebases.&# 160; Using newer CQS [Young] style approaches, we don’t really have to worry about this.</p> 