+++
type = "post"
date = "2009-02-16"
title = "Reporting Bounded Context and Performance"
description = ""
slug = "reporting-bounded-context-and-performance"
tags = []
+++

<p>The more I think about having a completely separate reporting context, the more I love the concept.</p> <p>I love the idea that you can have a read-optimized version of your data. Obviously this idea is not new, it's the foundation of data warehousing. I'm not going down that road quite that far for my situation. It's the idea of having reporting be its own bounded context--its own separate sub-domain which is appealing. Your write-only, sub-domain bounded context would simply make the changes/updates available to the read-only domain in some fashion.</p> <p>The performance implications of a read-optimized version are staggering. First of all, you can have a query (as in command/query separation) that retrieves all necessary data in one fell swoop--one database command--for a specific screen, rather than lots of little ones. Since you have to retrieve all of the necessary data for a particular view, you might as well get it all at the same time.</p> <p>In 2002, I was kicking around something very similar to this; I would attempt to get all data for a particular screen as part of a single database query (set of queries in a single command). Performance rocked, but the code was a mess because I was going about it completely wrong. This was all pre-DDD and the code had a bunch of really nasty side-effects, e.g. welding my business and presentation layers together, etc. By having a different bounded context, the separation is maintained.</p> <p>Other performance improvements could obviously be an optimized database table/view structure as well as different indexing strategies, along with the application's caching strategy. Finally, the database could be completely replicated--I would probably use something like MySQL Cluster rather than SQL Server Replication in this type of scenario.</p> 