+++
type = "post"
date = "2009-10-19"
title = "Testing Time—Static Calls and ISystemTime"
description = ""
slug = "testing-time-static-calls-and-isystemtime"
tags = []
+++

<p>In my <a href="/2009/10/ddd-entity-injection-and-mocking-time.html">previous post</a>, I talked about a technique that I saw for testing time and also about how I simply injected some kind of ISystemTime/IClock interface.&# 160; The problem with that was having to do injection at every level—including domain entities.</p> <p><a href="http://ayende.com/Blog/archive/2008/07/07/Dealing-with-time-in-tests.aspx">Oren Eini’s method</a>, while probably the most simple and easiest to implement (both of which are *good things*) has two small issues:</p> <ol> <li>Implicit disposability.&# 160; You have to remember to reset the static lambda expression every time it’s set. </li> <li>Thread isolation: All calls are to a single, static instance and return the same value—running unit tests in parallel can be dangerous. </li> </ol> <p>With that I mind I decided to create my own small library to address those issues.</p> <p><strong>Oh No!&# 160; Another Library</strong></p> <p>In the past I would normally have put this new code into a library with other infrastructure code.&# 160; I purposefully avoided mixing this code with any other concern because I want to have a truly static library—one that I compile and continue to use for the next five years without updating it.&# 160; I want a library that any and all projects can depend upon and has a stable implementation and can be considered as fundamental as Microsoft’s BCL (System.*) implementations.</p> <p><strong><a href="http://github.com/joliver/OpenXtensions.SystemTime">OpenXtensions</a></strong></p> <p>Therefore, I present <a href="http://github.com/joliver/OpenXtensions.SystemTime">OpenXtensions.SystemTime</a>.&# 160; I named it that facilitate Google-fo.&# 160; OpenXtensions.* will be a set of small libraries related to simple, helper methods and behavior surrounding deficiencies and rough spots in the BCL.&# 160; Common usage looks like the following:</p> <blockquote> <p>var instant = DateTime.Parse('”2000-01-01”);</p> <p>using (SystemTime.Is(instant))</p> <p>{</p> <p>&# 160;&# 160;&# 160; // do some work</p> <p>&# 160;&# 160;&# 160; var currentTime = SystemTime.UtcNow;</p> <p>}</p> </blockquote> <p>The library is about 7K and is signed with a strong key.&# 160; It is under the MIT license so you’re free to do whatever you’d like with it.</p> <p><strong>Dependency Injection</strong></p> <p>For those of you who want to continue to use dependency injection, I created an interface ISystemTime as well as a class SystemTimeAdapter (which implements ISystemTime).&# 160; You can inject this into your objects as necessary and it will call SystemTime.UtcNow on your behalf.</p> <p>UPDATE: <a href="http://davybrion.com/blog/2009/10/testability-of-date-dependent-code/comment-page-1/# comment-22795">Davy Brion linked</a> to <a href="/2009/10/ddd-entity-injection-and-mocking-time.html">my previous article</a> on this subject.&# 160; In the comments for Davy’s post, Mel Grubb <a href="http://melgrubb.spaces.live.com/blog/cns!A44BB98A805C8996!263.entry">linked to his solution</a>, which is very similar to the one I have detailed here.&# 160; For what it’s worth, one key different would be that Mel stores a “DateTimeContext” on the thread while I’m storing the DateTime.</p> 