+++
type = "post"
date = "2009-10-21"
title = "Testing Time - The Best of Both Worlds"
description = ""
slug = "testing-time-the-best-of-both-worlds"
tags = []
+++

<p>I am a big fan of "the simplest thing that could possibly work". The elegance and simplicity of the following code is hard to overstate:</p> <p>public static Func<datetime> Now = () => DateTime.Now</datetime></p> <p>It's wonderful because there are no external dependencies, no external libraries, and no versioning issues. Furthermore, we've placed a layer of indirection such that we can easily substitute calls to DateTime.[Utc]Now as necessary.</p> <p>The only problem with this code is that it works at a single layer. If you were doing a full-blown integration test (and mocking time for some reason), you would have to ensure that all each individual library that had a dependency upon time had their own individual representation of "public static Func<datetime> Now" properly set.</datetime></p> <p>One possible solution would be…another layer of indirection. Specifically, during application wire-up and IoC configuration/setup, you simply re-assign the "Now" instance for each library (probably doing some kind of reflective search/wire-up) with something like the following:</p> <p>public static Func<datetime> Now = () => <strong><a href="/testing-timestatic-calls-and">SystemTime</a></strong>.Now</datetime></p> <p>Where "<a href="/testing-timestatic-calls-and">SystemTime</a>" is a thread-local instance of time (if mocked), otherwise DateTime.[Utc]Now is called. Thread isolation is important because each thread can now have their own representation of time, if desired.</p> <p><strong>Win-Win?</strong></p> <p>What does the above scenario give us?</p> <ol> <li>By utilizing the standard "Func<datetime> Now = () => DateTime.Now", we have absolutely *zero* dependencies on external, non-BCL libraries. That's a huge win because we avoid versioning-related issues.</datetime></li> <li>By re-assigning the value of "Now" to <a href="/testing-timestatic-calls-and">SystemTime</a>.Now during IoC wire-up/app startup/unit testing [SetUp], we have the ability to mock/fake time all the way down from the top layer/application-tier through to the bottom layer/infrastructure tier with a single statement, e.g. "using (SystemTime.Is(fakeTime)) { … }"</li> </ol> <p>It feels like a win-win because only the host application's IoC container needs to be aware of this external dependency and we keep our application/library code as simple as possible.</p> 